Chapter  I 


When  Mr.  Bilbo  Baggins  of  Bag  End  announced  that  he 
a  party  of  special  magnificence,  there  was  much  talk  and 

wonder  of  the  Shire  for  sixty  years,  ever  since  his  remarkable 
brought  back  from  his  travels  had  now  become  a  local  legend, 
say,  that  the  Hill  at  Bag  End  was  full  of  tunnels  stuffed  with 
his  prolonged  vigour  to  marvel  at.  Time  wore  on,  but  it 
much  the  same  as  at  fifty.  At  ninety-nine  they  began  to  call 
mark.  There  were  some  that  shook  their  heads  and  thought 
anyone  should  possess  (apparently)  perpetual  youth  as  well 

trouble  will  come  of  it!’ 
But  so  far  trouble  had  not  come;  and  as  Mr.  Baggins  was 
give  him  his  oddities  and  his  good  fortune.  He  remained 
Sackville-Bagginses),  and  he  had  many  devoted  admirers 
had  no  close  friends,  until  some  of  his  younger  cousins  began 

28 


The  eldest  of  these,  and  Bilbo’s  favourite,  was  young  Frodo 
his  heir,  and  brought  him  to  live  at  Bag  End;  and  the  hopes  of 
happened  to  have  the  same  birthday,  September  22nd.  ‘You 
one  day;  ‘and  then  we  can  celebrate  our  birthday-parties 
tweens,  as  the  hobbits  called  the  irresponsible  twenties 

given  very  lively  combined  birthday-parties  at  Bag  End;  but 
was  being  planned  for  that  autumn.  Bilbo  was  going  to  be 
spectable  age  for  a  hobbit  (the  Old  Took  himself  had  only 
important  number:  the  date  of  his  ‘coming  of  age’. 
Tongues  began  to  wag  in  Hobbiton  and  Bywater;  and 
history  and  character  of  Mr.  Bilbo  Baggins  became  once 
suddenly  found  their  reminiscences  in  welcome  demand. 
No  one  had  a  more  attentive  audience  than  old  Flam 
The  Ivy  Bush,  a  small  inn  on  the  Bywater  road;  and  he  spoke 
End  for  forty  years,  and  had  helped  old  Holman  in  the  same 
stiff  in  the  joints,  the  job  was  mainly  carried  on  by  his  young¬ 
friendly  terms  with  Bilbo  and  Frodo.  They  lived  on  the  Hill 

always  said,’  the  Gaffer  declared.  With  perfect  truth:  for  Bilbo 

A  LONG-EXPECTED  PARTY 


consulting  him  constantly  upon  the  growing  of  vegetables  - 
recognized  as  the  leading  authority  by  all  in  the  neighbour¬ 

Noakes  of  Bywater.  ‘Baggins  is  his  name,  but  he’s  more  than 
of  Hobbiton  should  go  looking  for  a  wife  away  there  in 

(the  Gaffer’s  next-door  neighbour),  ‘if  they  live  on  the  wrong 
That’s  a  dark  bad  place,  if  half  the  tales  be  true.’ 
‘You’re  right,  Dad!’  said  the  Gaffer.  ‘Not  that  the  Brandy- 
breed,  seemingly.  They  fool  about  with  boats  on  that  big 
of  it,  I  say.  But  be  that  as  it  may,  Mr.  Frodo  is  as  nice  a 
Mr.  Bilbo,  and  in  more  than  looks.  After  all  his  father  was 
Baggins;  there  was  never  much  to  tell  of  him,  till  he  was 

other  darker  rumours  before,  of  course;  but  hobbits  have  a 
again. 
‘Well,  so  they  say,’  said  the  Gaffer.  ‘You  see:  Mr.  Drogo, 
Bilbo’s  first  cousin  on  the  mother’s  side  (her  mother  being 
was  his  second  cousin.  So  Mr.  Frodo  is  his  first  and  second 
follow  me.  And  Mr.  Drogo  was  staying  at  Brandy  Hall  with 
after  his  marriage  (him  being  partial  to  his  vittles,  and  old 

30 


boating  on  the  Brandywine  River;  and  he  and  his  wife  were 

moonlight,’  said  Old  Noakes;  ‘and  it  was  Drogo’s  weight  as 

him,’  said  Sandyman,  the  Hobbiton  miller. 
‘You  shouldn’t  listen  to  all  you  hear,  Sandyman,’  said  the 
to  go  talking  of  pushing  and  pulling.  Boats  are  quite  tricky 
cause  of  trouble.  Anyway:  there  was  this  Mr.  Frodo  left  an 
Bucklanders,  being  brought  up  anyhow  in  Brandy  Hall.  A 
had  fewer  than  a  couple  of  hundred  relations  in  the  place. 
lad  back  to  live  among  decent  folk. 
‘But  I  reckon  it  was  a  nasty  knock  for  those  Sackville- 
that  time  when  he  went  off  and  was  thought  to  be  dead.  And 
living  and  living,  and  never  looking  a  day  older,  bless  him! 
made  out  proper.  The  Sackville-Bagginses  won’t  never  see 

tell,’  said  a  stranger,  a  visitor  on  business  from  Michel 
tunnels  packed  with  chests  of  gold  and  silver,  and  jools,  by 

the  Gaffer.  ‘I  know  nothing  about  jools.  Mr.  Bilbo  is  free  with 
tunnel-making.  I  saw  Mr.  Bilbo  when  he  came  back,  a  matter 
prentice  to  old  Holman  (him  being  my  dad’s  cousin),  but  he 


31 

pling  and  trapessing  all  over  the  garden  while  the  sale  was 
with  a  pony  and  some  mighty  big  bags  and  a  couple  of  chests. 
up  in  foreign  parts,  where  there  be  mountains  of  gold,  they 
will  know  more  about  that.  He’s  in  and  out  of  Bag  End. 
all  Mr.  Bilbo’s  tales.  Mr.  Bilbo  has  learned  him  his  letters  - 
of  it. 
‘ Elves  and  Dragons!  I  says  to  him.  Cabbages  and  potatoes  are 
of  your  betters,  or  you’ll  land  in  trouble  too  big  for  you,  I  says  to 
the  stranger  and  the  miller. 
But  the  Gaffer  did  not  convince  his  audience.  The  legend 
the  younger  generation  of  hobbits. 
‘Ah,  but  he  has  likely  enough  been  adding  to  what  he 
‘He’s  often  away  from  home.  And  look  at  the  outlandish  folk 
conjuror,  Gandalf,  and  all.  You  can  say  what  you  like,  Gaffer, 

more  of  than  you  do  of  boating,  Mr.  Sandyman,’  retorted 
being  queer,  then  we  could  do  with  a  bit  more  queerness  in 
pint  of  beer  to  a  friend,  if  they  lived  in  a  hole  with  golden 
that  everyone’s  going  to  be  invited  to  the  party,  and  there’s 
month  as  is.’ 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

ask.  A  day  or  two  later  a  rumour  (probably  started  by  the 
to  be  fireworks  -  fireworks,  what  is  more,  such  as  had  not 
the  Old  Took  died. 
Days  passed  and  The  Day  drew  nearer.  An  odd-looking 
ton  one  evening  and  toiled  up  the  Hill  to  Bag  End.  The 
was  driven  by  outlandish  folk,  singing  strange  songs:  dwarves 
at  Bag  End.  At  the  end  of  the  second  week  in  September  a 
wine  Bridge  in  broad  daylight.  An  old  man  was  driving  it  all 
a  silver  scarf.  He  had  a  long  white  beard  and  bushy  eyebrows 
children  ran  after  the  cart  all  through  Hobbiton  and  right  up 
At  Bilbo’s  front  door  the  old  man  began  to  unload:  there 
labelled  with  a  large  red  G  ^  and  the  elf-rune,  JJ>! 
That  was  Gandalf’s  mark,  of  course,  and  the  old  man 
mainly  to  his  skill  with  fires,  smokes,  and  lights.  His  real 
Shire -folk  knew  nothing  about  it.  To  them  he  was  just  one 
the  hobbit-children.  ‘G  for  Grand!’  they  shouted,  and  the 
appeared  in  Hobbiton  occasionally  and  never  stopped  long; 
seen  one  of  his  firework  displays  -  they  now  belonged  to  a 

had  finished  unloading,  Bilbo  gave  a  few  pennies  away;  but 


appointment  of  the  onlookers. 
‘Run  away  now!’  said  Gandalf.  ‘You  will  get  plenty  when 
the  door  was  shut.  The  young  hobbits  stared  at  the  door  in 
the  party  would  never  come. 
Inside  Bag  End,  Bilbo  and  Gandalf  were  sitting  at  the  open 
The  late  afternoon  was  bright  and  peaceful.  The  flowers 
nasturtians  trailing  all  over  the  turf  walls  and  peeping  in  at 


the  dear  old  Shire;  but  I  think  I  need  a  holiday.’ 
‘You  mean  to  go  on  with  your  plan  then?’ 
‘I  do.  I  made  up  my  mind  months  ago,  and  I  haven’t 

plan  -  your  whole  plan,  mind  -  and  I  hope  it  will  turn  out 

and  have  my  little  joke.’ 
‘Who  will  laugh,  I  wonder?’  said  Gandalf,  shaking  his  head. 
‘We  shall  see,’  said  Bilbo. 
The  next  day  more  carts  rolled  up  the  Hill,  and  still  more 
locally’,  but  that  very  week  orders  began  to  pour  out  of  Bag 
could  be  obtained  in  Hobbiton  or  Bywater  or  anywhere  in 
began  to  tick  off  the  days  on  the  calendar;  and  they  watched 


34 


Hobbiton  post-office  was  blocked,  and  the  Bywater  post- 
were  called  for.  There  was  a  constant  stream  of  them  going 
you,  I  shall  certainly  come. 
A  notice  appeared  on  the  gate  at  Bag  End:  no  admit¬ 
or  pretended  to  have  Party  Business  were  seldom  allowed 
answers,  packing  up  presents,  and  making  some  private 
he  remained  hidden  from  view. 
One  morning  the  hobbits  woke  to  find  the  large  field,  south 
and  pavilions.  A  special  entrance  was  cut  into  the  bank 
were  built  there.  The  three  hobbit-families  of  Bagshot  Row, 
envied.  Old  Gaffer  Gamgee  stopped  even  pretending  to  work 

pavilion,  so  big  that  the  tree  that  grew  in  the  field  was  right 
the  chief  table.  Lanterns  were  hung  on  all  its  branches. 
open-air  kitchen  was  erected  in  the  north  corner  of  the  field. 
miles  around,  arrived  to  supplement  the  dwarves  and  other 
its  height. 
Then  the  weather  clouded  over.  That  was  on  Wednesday 
September  the  22nd,  actually  dawned.  The  sun  got  up,  the 

of  entertainments  rolled  into  one.  Practically  everybody  living 

A  LONG-EXPECTED  PARTY 


but  as  they  turned  up  all  the  same,  that  did  not  matter.  Many 
there  were  even  a  few  from  outside  the  borders.  Bilbo  met 
He  gave  away  presents  to  all  and  sundry  -  the  latter  were 
by  the  gate.  Hobbits  give  presents  to  other  people  on  their 
so  lavishly  as  on  this  occasion;  but  it  was  not  a  bad  system. 
somebody’s  birthday,  so  that  every  hobbit  in  those  parts  had 
they  never  got  tired  of  them. 
On  this  occasion  the  presents  were  unusually  good.  The 
forgot  about  eating.  There  were  toys  the  like  of  which  they 
cal.  Many  of  them  had  indeed  been  ordered  a  year  before, 
and  were  of  real  dwarf-make. 
When  every  guest  had  been  welcomed  and  was  finally 
of  course,  food  and  drink.  There  were  three  official  meals: 
marked  chiefly  by  the  fact  that  at  those  times  all  the  guests 
were  merely  lots  of  people  eating  and  drinking  -  continuously 

by  him,  but  designed  and  made  by  him;  and  the  special 
him.  But  there  was  also  a  generous  distribution  of  squibs, 
fountains,  goblin-barkers  and  thunder-claps.  They  were  all 

with  sweet  voices.  There  were  green  trees  with  trunks  of  dark 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

moment,  and  their  shining  branches  dropped  glowing  flowers 
scent  just  before  they  touched  their  upturned  faces.  There 
there  were  pillars  of  coloured  fires  that  rose  and  turned  into 
was  a  red  thunderstorm  and  a  shower  of  yellow  rain;  there 
with  a  yell  like  an  embattled  army,  and  came  down  again  into 
was  also  one  last  surprise,  in  honour  of  Bilbo,  and  it  startled 
out.  A  great  smoke  went  up.  It  shaped  itself  like  a  mountain 
spouted  green  and  scarlet  flames.  Out  flew  a  red-golden 
jaws,  his  eyes  glared  down;  there  was  a  roar,  and  he  whizzed 
and  many  fell  flat  on  their  faces.  The  dragon  passed  like  an 
with  a  deafening  explosion. 
‘That  is  the  signal  for  supper!’  said  Bilbo.  The  pain  and 
their  feet.  There  was  a  splendid  supper  for  everyone;  for 
dinner-party.  This  was  held  in  the  great  pavilion  with  the 
also  called  by  the  hobbits  one  Gross,  though  the  word  was 
selected  from  all  the  families  to  which  Bilbo  and  Frodo  were 
(such  as  Gandalf) .  Many  young  hobbits  were  included,  and 
with  their  children  in  the  matter  of  sitting  up  late,  especially 
up  young  hobbits  took  a  lot  of  provender. 


37 

Tooks  and  Brandybucks;  there  were  various  Grubbs  (re¬ 
(connexions  of  his  Took  grandfather);  and  a  selection  of 
Hornblowers  and  Proudfoots.  Some  of  these  were  only  very 
been  in  Hobbiton  before,  as  they  lived  in  remote  corners  of 
and  his  wife  Lobelia  were  present.  They  disliked  Bilbo  and 
written  in  golden  ink,  that  they  had  felt  it  was  impossible  to 
food  for  many  years  and  his  table  had  a  high  reputation. 
All  the  one  hundred  and  forty-four  guests  expected  a  pleas¬ 
of  their  host  (an  inevitable  item) .  He  was  liable  to  drag  in  bits 
two,  would  allude  to  the  absurd  adventures  of  his  mysterious 
pleasant  feast,  in  fact  an  engrossing  entertainment:  rich, 
fell  almost  to  nothing  throughout  the  district  in  the  ensuing 
of  the  stores,  cellars  and  warehouses  for  miles  around,  that 

the  company  were,  however,  now  in  a  tolerant  mood,  at  that 
They  were  sipping  their  favourite  drinks,  and  nibbling  at  their 
prepared  to  listen  to  anything,  and  to  cheer  at  every  full  stop. 
My  dear  People ,  began  Bilbo,  rising  in  his  place.  ‘Hear! 
seeming  reluctant  to  follow  their  own  advice.  Bilbo  left  his 
tree.  The  light  of  the  lanterns  fell  on  his  beaming  face;  the 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

could  all  see  him  standing,  waving  one  hand  in  the  air,  the 

dear  Books  and  Brandybucks,  and  Grubbs,  and  Chubbs,  and 
bodies,  Brockhouses  and  Proudfoots.  ‘ProudFEETl’  shouted  an 
course,  was  Proudfoot,  and  well  merited;  his  feet  were  large, 

that  I  welcome  back  at  last  to  Bag  End.  Today  is  my  one  hundred 
ray!  Many  Happy  Returns!’  they  shouted,  and  they  ham¬ 
This  was  the  sort  of  stuff  they  liked:  short  and  obvious. 
I  hope  you  are  all  enjoying  yourselves  as  much  as  I  am.  Deaf¬ 
horns,  pipes  and  flutes,  and  other  musical  instruments.  There 
dreds  of  musical  crackers  had  been  pulled.  Most  of  them 
most  of  the  hobbits,  but  they  all  agreed  they  were  marvellous 
make  and  enchanting  tones.  Indeed,  in  one  corner  some  of 
to  have  finished  (since  he  had  plainly  said  all  that  was  neces¬ 
merry  dance-tune.  Master  Everard  Took  and  Miss  Melilot 
began  to  dance  the  Springle-ring:  a  pretty  dance,  but  rather 

nearby,  he  blew  three  loud  hoots.  The  noise  subsided.  I  shall 
have  called  you  all  together  for  a  Purpose.  Something  in  the 

A  LONG-EXPECTED  PARTY 


silence,  and  one  or  two  of  the  Tooks  pricked  up  their  ears. 
Indeed,  for  Three  Purposes!  First  of  all,  to  tell  you  that  I  am 
short  a  time  to  live  among  such  excellent  and  admirable  hobbits. 

like  less  than  half  of  you  half  as  well  as  you  deserve.  This  was 
clapping,  but  most  of  them  were  trying  to  work  it  out  and 

say:  OUR  birthday.  For  it  is,  of  course,  also  the  birthday  of  my 
today.  Some  perfunctory  clapping  by  the  elders;  and  some 
juniors.  The  Sackville-Bagginses  scowled,  and  wondered 

were  chosen  to  fit  this  remarkable  total:  One  Gross,  if  I  may  use 
guests,  and  especially  the  Sackville-Bagginses,  were  insulted, 
number,  like  goods  in  a  package.  ‘One  Gross,  indeed!  Vulgar 

anniversary  of  my  arrival  by  barrel  at  Esgaroth  on  the  Long 
on  that  occasion.  I  was  only  fifty -one  then,  and  birthdays  did  not 
though  I  had  a  bad  cold  at  the  time,  I  remember,  and  could  only 
you  very  much  for  coming  to  my  little  party.  Obstinate  silence. 
nent;  and  they  were  getting  bored.  Why  couldn’t  he  stop 
or  recite.  He  paused  for  a  moment. 
Thirdly  and  finally,  he  said,  I  wish  to  make  an 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

suddenly  that  everyone  sat  up  who  still  could.  I  regret  to 
short  a  time  to  spend  among  you  -  this  is  the  END.  I  am  going. 

of  light,  and  the  guests  all  blinked.  When  they  opened  their 
four  flabbergasted  hobbits  sat  back  speechless.  Old  Odo 
Then  there  was  a  dead  silence,  until  suddenly,  after  several 
Grubb,  Chubb,  Burrows,  Bolger,  Bracegirdle,  Brockhouse, 

and  more  food  and  drink  were  needed  to  cure  the  guests  of 
probably  the  most  popular  comment.  Even  the  Tooks  (with 
the  moment  most  of  them  took  it  for  granted  that  his 

an  enormous  dinner  had  clouded  his  wits,  and  he  said  to  his 
my  dear!  I  believe  that  mad  Baggins  is  off  again.  Silly  old 
He  called  loudly  to  Frodo  to  send  the  wine  round  again. 
Frodo  was  the  only  one  present  who  had  said  nothing.  For 
ignored  all  remarks  and  questions.  He  had  enjoyed  the  joke, 
difficulty  in  keeping  from  laughter  at  the  indignant  surprise 
he  realized  suddenly  that  he  loved  the  old  hobbit  dearly.  Most 
Bilbo  Baggins’  oddities,  past  and  present;  but  the  Sackville- 


41 

to  have  any  more  to  do  with  the  party.  He  gave  orders  for 
glass  silently  to  the  health  of  Bilbo,  and  slipped  out  of  the 

he  had  been  fingering  the  golden  ring  in  his  pocket:  his  magic 
down  he  slipped  it  on  his  finger,  and  he  was  never  seen  by 

listening  with  a  smile  to  the  din  in  the  pavilion,  and  to  the 
went  in.  He  took  off  his  party  clothes,  folded  up  and  wrapped 
away.  Then  he  put  on  quickly  some  old  untidy  garments, 
hung  a  short  sword  in  a  battered  black-leather  scabbard. 
out  an  old  cloak  and  hood.  They  had  been  locked  up  as  if 
weatherstained  that  their  original  colour  could  hardly  be 
large  for  him.  He  then  went  into  his  study,  and  from  a  large 
leather-bound  manuscript;  and  also  a  large  bulky  envelope. 
that  was  standing  there,  already  nearly  full.  Into  the  enve¬ 
sealed  it,  and  addressed  it  to  Frodo.  At  first  he  put  it  on  the 
pocket.  At  that  moment  the  door  opened  and  Gandalf  came 


down  in  a  chair,  ‘I  wanted  to  catch  you  and  have  a  few 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

splendidly  and  according  to  plan?’ 
‘Yes,  I  do,’  said  Bilbo.  ‘Though  that  flash  was  surprising: 
your  own,  I  suppose?’ 
‘It  was.  You  have  wisely  kept  that  ring  secret  all  these  years, 
else  that  would  seem  to  explain  your  sudden  vanishment.’ 
‘And  would  spoil  my  joke.  You  are  an  interfering  old  busy¬ 

about  this  whole  affair.  It  has  now  come  to  the  final  point. 
your  relations,  and  given  the  whole  Shire  something  to  talk 
any  further?’ 
‘Yes,  I  am.  I  feel  I  need  a  holiday,  a  very  long  holiday,  as 
expect  I  shall  return.  In  fact,  I  don’t  mean  to,  and  I  have 

to  feel  it  in  my  heart  of  hearts.  Well-preserved  indeed!’  he 
what  I  mean:  like  butter  that  has  been  scraped  over  too  much 

not  seem  right,’  he  said  thoughtfully.  ‘No,  after  all  I  believe 

tains  again,  Gandalf  -  mountains',  and  then  find  somewhere 
prying  around,  and  a  string  of  confounded  visitors  hanging 
book.  I  have  thought  of  a  nice  ending  for  it:  and  he  lived 

book,  however  it  ends.’ 


43 

already,  as  far  as  it  has  gone.  You’ll  keep  an  eye  on  Frodo, 


he  offered  to  once,  just  before  the  party.  But  he  does  not 
I  die,  and  the  Mountains;  but  he  is  still  in  love  with  the 
comfortable  here.  I  am  leaving  everything  to  him,  of  course, 
gets  used  to  being  on  his  own.  It’s  time  he  was  his  own  master 

to  that,  you  remember.’ 
‘Well,  er,  yes,  I  suppose  so,’  stammered  Bilbo. 
Where  is  it?’ 
‘In  an  envelope,  if  you  must  know,’  said  Bilbo  impatiently. 
pocket!’  He  hesitated.  ‘Isn’t  that  odd  now?’  he  said  softly 
there?’ 
Gandalf  looked  again  very  hard  at  Bilbo,  and  there  was  a 
leave  it  behind.  Don’t  you  want  to?’ 
Well  yes  -  and  no.  Now  it  comes  to  it,  I  don’t  like  parting 
Why  do  you  want  me  to?’  he  asked,  and  a  curious  change 
ance.  ‘You  are  always  badgering  me  about  my  ring;  but  you 
my  journey.’ 
‘No,  but  I  had  to  badger  you,’  said  Gandalf.  ‘I  wanted  the 
they  are  rare  and  curious.  I  was  professionally  interested  in 
where  it  is,  if  you  go  wandering  again.  Also  I  think  you  have 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

unless  I  am  quite  mistaken.’ 
Bilbo  flushed,  and  there  was  an  angry  light  in  his  eyes.  His 
business  is  it  of  yours,  anyway,  to  know  what  I  do  with  my 


My  own.  My  Precious.  Yes,  my  Precious.’ 
The  wizard’s  face  remained  grave  and  attentive,  and  only 
indeed  alarmed.  ‘It  has  been  called  that  before,’  he  said,  ‘but 

same  once.  It’s  not  his  now,  but  mine.  And  I  shall  keep  it,  I 

you  do,  Bilbo,’  he  said.  ‘You  make  that  clearer  with  every 
And  then  you  can  go  yourself,  and  be  free.’ 
‘I’ll  do  as  I  choose  and  go  as  I  please,’  said  Bilbo  obstinately. 
‘Now,  now,  my  dear  hobbit!’  said  Gandalf.  ‘All  your  long 
Do  as  you  promised:  give  it  up!’ 
‘Well,  if  you  want  my  ring  yourself,  say  so!’  cried  Bilbo. 
you.’  His  hand  strayed  to  the  hilt  of  his  small  sword. 
Gandalf’s  eyes  flashed.  ‘It  will  be  my  turn  to  get  angry 
see  Gandalf  the  Grey  uncloaked.’  He  took  a  step  towards  the 
filled  the  little  room. 
Bilbo  backed  away  to  the  wall,  breathing  hard,  his  hand 
another,  and  the  air  of  the  room  tingled.  Gandalf’s  eyes 
he  began  to  tremble. 


45 

‘You  have  never  been  like  this  before.  What  is  it  all  about?  It 
if  I  hadn’t  kept  it.  I’m  not  a  thief,  whatever  he  said.’ 
‘I  have  never  called  you  one,’  Gandalf  answered.  ‘And  I 
you.  I  wish  you  would  trust  me,  as  you  used.’  He  turned 
to  an  old  grey  man,  bent  and  troubled. 
Bilbo  drew  his  hand  over  his  eyes.  ‘I  am  sorry,’  he  said. 
to  be  bothered  with  it  any  more.  It  has  been  so  growing  on 
looking  at  me.  And  I  am  always  wanting  to  put  it  on  and 
pulling  it  out  to  make  sure.  I  tried  locking  it  up,  but  I  found 
And  I  don’t  seem  able  to  make  up  my  mind.’ 
‘Then  trust  mine,’  said  Gandalf.  ‘It  is  quite  made  up.  Go 
and  I  will  look  after  him.’ 
Bilbo  stood  for  a  moment  tense  and  undecided.  Presently 
shrugged  his  shoulders,  and  smiled  rather  ruefully.  ‘After  all 
away  lots  of  birthday-presents,  and  somehow  make  it  easier 
in  the  end,  but  it  would  be  a  pity  to  waste  all  my  preparations. 

affair,’  said  Gandalf. 
‘Very  well,’  said  Bilbo,  ‘it  goes  to  Frodo  with  all  the  rest.’ 
or  somebody  else  will  catch  me.  I  have  said  good-bye,  and  I 
and  moved  to  the  door. 
‘You  have  still  got  the  ring  in  your  pocket,’  said  the  wizard. 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

documents  too.  You  had  better  take  it  and  deliver  it  for  me. 

mantelpiece.  It  will  be  safe  enough  there,  till  Frodo  comes.  I 

it  by  the  clock,  his  hand  jerked  back,  and  the  packet  fell  on 
seized  it  and  set  it  in  its  place.  A  spasm  of  anger  passed 
a  look  of  relief  and  a  laugh. 
‘Well,  that’s  that,’  he  said.  ‘Now  I’m  off!’ 
They  went  out  into  the  hall.  Bilbo  chose  his  favourite  stick 
of  different  rooms  where  they  had  been  busy. 
‘Is  everything  ready?’  asked  Bilbo.  ‘Everything  packed  and 



He  looked  up,  sniffing  the  air.  What  fun!  What  fun  to  be  off 
really  been  longing  for,  for  years!  Good-bye!’  he  said,  looking 

You  are  old  enough,  and  perhaps  wise  enough.’ 
‘Take  care!  I  don’t  care.  Don’t  you  worry  about  me!  I  am 
deal.  But  the  time  has  come.  I  am  being  swept  off  my  feet  at 
sang  softly  in  the  dark: 
The  Road  goes  ever  on  and  on 



A  LONG-EXPECTED  PARTY 


Pursuing  it  with  eager  feet, 
Until  it  joins  some  larger  way 


he  turned  away  from  the  lights  and  voices  in  the  field  and 
into  his  garden,  and  trotted  down  the  long  sloping  path.  He 
to  the  meadows,  passing  into  the  night  like  a  rustle  of  wind 

darkness.  ‘Good-bye,  my  dear  Bilbo  -  until  our  next  meet¬ 

the  dark,  deep  in  thought.  ‘Has  he  gone?’  he  asked. 
‘Yes,’  answered  Gandalf,  ‘he  has  gone  at  last.’ 
‘I  wish  - 1  mean,  I  hoped  until  this  evening  that  it  was  only 
meant  to  go.  He  always  used  to  joke  about  serious  things.  I 

said  Gandalf.  ‘Don’t  be  too  troubled.  He’ll  be  all  right  -  now. 

at  it,  but  did  not  open  it. 
‘You’ll  find  his  will  and  all  the  other  documents  in  there,  I 
And  also,  I  fancy,  you’ll  find  a  golden  ring.’ 
‘The  ring!’  exclaimed  Frodo.  ‘Has  he  left  me  that?  I  wonder 

use  of  it,  if  I  were  you.  But  keep  it  secret,  and  keep  it  safe! 


48 


As  master  of  Bag  End  Frodo  felt  it  his  painful  duty  to  say 
now  spread  all  over  the  field,  but  Frodo  would  only  say  no 
night  carriages  came  for  the  important  folk.  One  by  one 
Gardeners  came  by  arrangement,  and  removed  in  wheel¬ 

later.  Morning  went  on.  People  came  and  began  (by  orders) 
the  spoons  and  knives  and  bottles  and  plates,  and  the  lanterns, 
cracker-paper,  the  forgotten  bags  and  gloves  and  handker¬ 
number  of  other  people  came  (without  orders):  Bagginses, 
lived  or  were  staying  near.  By  mid-day,  when  even  the  best- 
End,  uninvited  but  not  unexpected. 
Frodo  was  waiting  on  the  step,  smiling,  but  looking  rather 
not  much  more  to  say  than  before.  His  reply  to  all  inquiries 
I  know,  for  good.’  Some  of  the  visitors  he  invited  to  come 

packages  and  parcels  and  small  articles  of  furniture.  On  every 
sort: 
ForADELARD  TO  OK,  for  his  VERY  OWN,  from  Bilbo',  on 

dence,  with  love  from  Bilbo;  on  a  large  waste-paper  basket. 
tive  of  Bilbo  and  Frodo;  she  was  ninety-nine,  and  had  written 

A  LONG-EXPECTED  PARTY  49 
For  MILO  BURROWS,  hoping  it  will  be  useful,  from  B.B.; 

mirror.  She  was  a  young  Baggins,  and  too  obviously  con¬ 

tributor ;  on  an  (empty)  book-case.  Hugo  was  a  great  borrower 

on  a  case  of  silver  spoons.  Bilbo  believed  that  she  had 
his  former  journey.  Lobelia  knew  that  quite  well.  When  she 
also  took  the  spoons. 
This  is  only  a  small  selection  of  the  assembled  presents. 
the  course  of  his  long  life.  It  was  a  tendency  of  hobbit-holes 
birthday-presents  was  largely  responsible.  Not,  of  course, 
or  two  old  mathoms  of  forgotten  uses  that  had  circulated  all 
and  kept  those  that  he  received.  The  old  hole  was  now  being 

out  personally  by  Bilbo,  and  several  had  some  point,  or  some 
they  would  be  wanted  and  welcome.  The  poorer  hobbits,  and 
Gamgee  got  two  sacks  of  potatoes,  a  new  spade,  a  woollen 
Rory  Brandybuck,  in  return  for  much  hospitality,  got  a  dozen 
farthing,  and  now  quite  mature,  as  it  had  been  laid  down  by 
capital  fellow  after  the  first  bottle. 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

course,  all  the  chief  treasures,  as  well  as  the  books,  pictures, 
There  was,  however,  no  sign  nor  mention  of  money  or  jewel¬ 

that  the  whole  household  was  being  distributed  free  spread 
people  who  had  no  business  there,  but  could  not  be  kept  out. 
people  tried  to  do  swaps  and  deals  in  the  hall;  and  others 
with  anything  that  seemed  unwanted  or  unwatched.  The  road 

arrived.  Frodo  had  retired  for  a  while  and  left  his  friend 
loudly  demanded  to  see  Frodo,  Merry  bowed  politely. 
‘He  is  indisposed,’  he  said.  ‘He  is  resting.’ 
‘Hiding,  you  mean,’  said  Lobelia.  ‘Anyway  we  want  to  see 

to  discover  their  parting  gift  of  spoons.  It  did  not  improve 
Frodo  was  sitting  at  a  table  with  a  lot  of  papers  in  front  of 
any  rate;  and  he  stood  up,  fidgeting  with  something  in  his 

by  offering  him  bad  bargain-prices  (as  between  friends)  for 
that  only  the  things  specially  directed  by  Bilbo  were  being 

you  are  doing  exceedingly  well  out  of  it.  I  insist  on  seeing 

A  LONG-EXPECTED  PARTY 


Otho  would  have  been  Bilbo’s  heir,  but  for  the  adoption 
unfortunately,  very  clear  and  correct  (according  to  the  legal 
signatures  of  witnesses  in  red  ink) . 
‘Foiled  again!’  he  said  to  his  wife.  ‘And  after  waiting  sixty 
Frodo’s  nose  and  stumped  off.  But  Lobelia  was  not  so  easily 
how  things  were  going  on,  and  found  her  still  about  the  place, 
escorted  her  firmly  off  the  premises,  after  he  had  relieved 
somehow  fallen  inside  her  umbrella.  Her  face  looked  as  if  she 
remark;  but  all  she  found  to  say,  turning  round  on  the  step, 

too?  You  don’t  belong  here;  you’re  no  Baggins  -  you  -  you’re 

said  Frodo  as  he  shut  the  door  on  her. 
‘It  was  a  compliment,’  said  Merry  Brandybuck,  ‘and  so,  of 

hobbits  (two  Boffins  and  a  Bolger)  who  were  knocking  holes 
young  Sancho  Proudfoot  (old  Odo  Proudfoot’s  grandson), 
thought  there  was  an  echo.  The  legend  of  Bilbo’s  gold  excited 
obtained,  if  not  positively  ill-gotten),  is,  as  everyone  knows, 

Frodo  collapsed  on  a  chair  in  the  hall.  ‘It’s  time  to  close  the 

52 


anyone  today,  not  even  if  they  bring  a  battering  ram.’  Then 

the  front-door.  ‘Lobelia  again  most  likely,’  he  thought.  ‘She 
back  again  to  say  it.  It  can  wait.’ 
He  went  on  with  his  tea.  The  knock  was  repeated,  much 
appeared  at  the  window. 
‘If  you  don’t  let  me  in,  Frodo,  I  shall  blow  your  door  right 

out  of  the  room  to  the  door.  ‘Come  in!  Come  in!  I  thought  it 

a  pony-trap  towards  Bywater  with  a  face  that  would  have 

tried  on  Bilbo’s  ring.  I  longed  to  disappear.’ 
‘Don’t  do  that!’  said  Gandalf,  sitting  down.  ‘Do  be  careful 
come  to  say  a  last  word.’ 
‘Well,  what  about  it?’ 
‘What  do  you  know  already?’ 
‘Only  what  Bilbo  told  me.  I  have  heard  his  story:  how  he 


said  Frodo.  ‘He  told  me  the  true  story  soon  after  I  came 
you,  so  I  had  better  know  too.  “No  secrets  between  us, 
anyway.”  ’ 
‘That’s  interesting,’  said  Gandalf.  Well,  what  did  you  think 

thought  the  true  story  much  more  likely,  and  I  couldn’t  see 


so,  anyway;  and  I  thought  it  rather  odd.’ 
‘So  did  I.  But  odd  things  may  happen  to  people  that  have 
to  be  very  careful  with  it.  It  may  have  other  powers  than  just 


to  wonder  about  the  ring,  especially  since  last  night.  No  need 
seldom,  or  not  at  all.  At  least  I  beg  you  not  to  use  it  in  any 
it  safe,  and  keep  it  secret!  ’ 
‘You  are  very  mysterious!  What  are  you  afraid  of?’ 
‘I  am  not  certain,  so  I  will  say  no  more.  I  may  be  able  to 
so  this  is  good-bye  for  the  present.’  He  got  up. 
‘At  once!’  cried  Frodo.  ‘Why,  I  thought  you  were  staying 

be  away  for  a  good  while;  but  I’ll  come  and  see  you  again,  as 
quietly.  I  shan’t  often  be  visiting  the  Shire  openly  again.  I 
nuisance  and  a  disturber  of  the  peace.  Some  people  are  actu¬ 
want  to  know,  there  is  supposed  to  be  a  plot  between  you 

Lobelia.  How  abominable!  I  would  give  them  Bag  End  and 
in  the  country  with  him.  I  love  the  Shire.  But  I  begin  to  wish, 
him  again.’ 
‘So  do  I,’  said  Gandalf.  ‘And  I  wonder  many  other  things. 
especially  at  unlikely  times!  Good-bye!’ 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

hand,  and  walked  off  at  a  surprising  pace;  but  Frodo  thought 
carrying  a  great  weight.  The  evening  was  closing  in,  and  his 
not  see  him  again  for  a  long  time. 