
A  LONG-EXPECTED  PARTY 

would  shortly  be  celebrating  his  eleventy-first  birthday  with 
excitement  in  Hobbiton. 
Bilbo  was  very  rich  and  very  peculiar,  and  had  been  the 
disappearance  and  unexpected  return.  The  riches  he  had 
and  it  was  popularly  believed,  whatever  the  old  folk  might 
treasure.  And  if  that  was  not  enough  for  fame,  there  was  also 
seemed  to  have  little  effect  on  Mr.  Baggins.  At  ninety  he  was 
him  well-preserved,  but  unchanged  would  have  been  nearer  the 
this  was  too  much  of  a  good  thing;  it  seemed  unfair  that 
as  (reputedly)  inexhaustible  wealth. 
‘It  will  have  to  be  paid  for,’  they  said.  ‘It  isn’t  natural,  and 

generous  with  his  money,  most  people  were  willing  to  for¬ 
on  visiting  terms  with  his  relatives  (except,  of  course,  the 
among  the  hobbits  of  poor  and  unimportant  families.  But  he 
to  grow  up. 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

Baggins.  When  Bilbo  was  ninety-nine  he  adopted  Frodo  as 
the  Sackville-Bagginses  were  finally  dashed.  Bilbo  and  Frodo 
had  better  come  and  live  here,  Frodo  my  lad,’  said  Bilbo 
comfortably  together.’  At  that  time  Frodo  was  still  in  his 
between  childhood  and  coming  of  age  at  thirty-three. 
Twelve  more  years  passed.  Each  year  the  Bagginses  had 
now  it  was  understood  that  something  quite  exceptional 
eleventy-one,  ill,  a  rather  curious  number,  and  a  very  re¬ 
reached  130);  and  Frodo  was  going  to  be  thirty-three,  33,  an 

rumour  of  the  coming  event  travelled  all  over  the  Shire.  The 
again  the  chief  topic  of  conversation;  and  the  older  folk 

Gamgee,  commonly  known  as  the  Gaffer.  Fie  held  forth  at 
with  some  authority,  for  he  had  tended  the  garden  at  Bag 
job  before  that.  Now  that  he  was  himself  growing  old  and 
est  son,  Sam  Gamgee.  Both  father  and  son  were  on  very 
itself,  in  Number  3  Bagshot  Row  just  below  Bag  End. 
‘A  very  nice  well-spoken  gentlehobbit  is  Mr.  Bilbo,  as  I’ve 
was  very  polite  to  him,  calling  him  ‘Master  Hamfast’,  and 


29 

in  the  matter  of  ‘roots’,  especially  potatoes,  the  Gaffer  was 
hood  (including  himself) . 
‘But  what  about  this  Frodo  that  lives  with  him?’  asked  Old 
half  a  Brandybuck,  they  say.  It  beats  me  why  any  Baggins 
Buckland,  where  folks  are  so  queer.’ 
‘And  no  wonder  they’re  queer,’  put  in  Daddy  Twofoot 
side  of  the  Brandywine  River,  and  right  agin  the  Old  Forest. 

bucks  of  Buckland  live  in  the  Old  Forest;  but  they’re  a  queer 
river  -  and  that  isn’t  natural.  Small  wonder  that  trouble  came 
young  hobbit  as  you  could  wish  to  meet.  Very  much  like 
a  Baggins.  A  decent  respectable  hobbit  was  Mr.  Drogo 
drownded.’ 
‘Drownded?’  said  several  voices.  They  had  heard  this  and 
passion  for  family  history,  and  they  were  ready  to  hear  it 

he  married  poor  Miss  Primula  Brandybuck.  She  was  our  Mr. 
the  youngest  of  the  Old  Took’s  daughters);  and  Mr.  Drogo 
cousin,  once  removed  either  way,  as  the  saying  is,  if  you 
his  father-in-law,  old  Master  Gorbadoc,  as  he  often  did 
Gorbadoc  keeping  a  mighty  generous  table) ;  and  he  went  out 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

drownded,  and  poor  Mr.  Frodo  only  a  child  and  all.’ 
‘I’ve  heard  they  went  on  the  water  after  dinner  in  the 
sunk  the  boat.’ 
‘And  /  heard  she  pushed  him  in,  and  he  pulled  her  in  after 

Gaffer,  who  did  not  much  like  the  miller.  ‘There  isn’t  no  call 
enough  for  those  that  sit  still  without  looking  further  for  the 
orphan  and  stranded,  as  you  might  say,  among  those  queer 
regular  warren,  by  all  accounts.  Old  Master  Gorbadoc  never 
Mr.  Bilbo  never  did  a  kinder  deed  than  when  he  brought  the 

Bagginses.  They  thought  they  were  going  to  get  Bag  End, 
then  he  comes  back  and  orders  them  off;  and  he  goes  on 
And  suddenly  he  produces  an  heir,  and  has  all  the  papers 
the  inside  of  Bag  End  now,  or  it  is  to  be  hoped  not.’ 
‘There’s  a  tidy  bit  of  money  tucked  away  up  there,  I  hear 
Delving  in  the  Westfarthing.  ‘All  the  top  of  your  hill  is  full  of 
what  I’ve  heard.’ 
‘Then  you’ve  heard  more  than  I  can  speak  to,’  answered 
his  money,  and  there  seems  no  lack  of  it;  but  I  know  of  no 
of  sixty  years  ago,  when  I  was  a  lad.  I’d  not  long  come 

A  LONG-EXPECTED  PARTY 


had  me  up  at  Bag  End  helping  him  to  keep  folks  from  tram¬ 
on.  And  in  the  middle  of  it  all  Mr.  Bilbo  comes  up  the  Hill 
I  don’t  doubt  they  were  mostly  full  of  treasure  he  had  picked 
say;  but  there  wasn’t  enough  to  fill  tunnels.  But  my  lad  Sam 
Crazy  about  stories  of  the  old  days,  he  is,  and  he  listens  to 
meaning  no  harm,  mark  you,  and  I  hope  no  harm  will  come 

better  for  me  and  yon.  Don’t  go  getting  mixed  up  in  the  business 
him.  And  I  might  say  it  to  others,’  he  added  with  a  look  at 

of  Bilbo’s  wealth  was  now  too  firmly  fixed  in  the  minds  of 

brought  at  first,’  argued  the  miller,  voicing  common  opinion. 
that  visit  him:  dwarves  coming  at  night,  and  that  old  wandering 
but  Bag  End’s  a  queer  place,  and  its  folk  are  queerer.’ 
‘And  you  can  say  what  you  like,  about  what  you  know  no 
the  Gaffer,  disliking  the  miller  even  more  than  usual.  ‘If  that’s 
these  parts.  There’s  some  not  far  away  that  wouldn’t  offer  a 
walls.  But  they  do  things  proper  at  Bag  End.  Our  Sam  says 
going  to  be  presents,  mark  you,  presents  for  all  -  this  very 

32 


That  very  month  was  September,  and  as  fine  as  you  could 
knowledgeable  Sam)  was  spread  about  that  there  were  going 
been  seen  in  the  Shire  for  nigh  on  a  century,  not  indeed  since 

waggon  laden  with  odd-looking  packages  rolled  into  Hobbi- 
startled  hobbits  peered  out  of  lamplit  doors  to  gape  at  it.  It 
with  long  beards  and  deep  hoods.  A  few  of  them  remained 
cart  came  in  through  Bywater  from  the  direction  of  Brandy¬ 
alone.  He  wore  a  tall  pointed  blue  hat,  a  long  grey  cloak,  and 
that  stuck  out  beyond  the  brim  of  his  hat.  Small  hobbit- 
the  hill.  It  had  a  cargo  of  fireworks,  as  they  rightly  guessed. 
were  great  bundles  of  fireworks  of  all  sorts  and  shapes,  each 

was  Gandalf  the  Wizard,  whose  fame  in  the  Shire  was  due 
business  was  far  more  difficult  and  dangerous,  but  the 
of  the  ‘attractions’  at  the  Party.  Hence  the  excitement  of 
old  man  smiled.  They  knew  him  by  sight,  though  he  only 
but  neither  they  nor  any  but  the  oldest  of  their  elders  had 
legendary  past. 
When  the  old  man,  helped  by  Bilbo  and  some  dwarves, 

A  LONG-EXPECTED  PARTY  33 
not  a  single  squib  or  cracker  was  forthcoming,  to  the  dis¬ 

the  time  comes.’  Then  he  disappeared  inside  with  Bilbo,  and 
vain  for  a  while,  and  then  made  off,  feeling  that  the  day  of 

window  of  a  small  room  looking  out  west  on  to  the  garden. 
glowed  red  and  golden:  snap-dragons  and  sunflowers,  and 
the  round  windows. 
‘How  bright  your  garden  looks!’  said  Gandalf. 
‘Yes,’  said  Bilbo.  ‘I  am  very  fond  indeed  of  it,  and  of  all 


changed  it.  ’ 
‘Very  well.  It  is  no  good  saying  any  more.  Stick  to  your 
for  the  best,  for  you,  and  for  all  of  us.’ 
‘I  hope  so.  Anyway  I  mean  to  enjoy  myself  on  Thursday, 



carts.  There  might  have  been  some  grumbling  about  ‘dealing 
End  for  every  kind  of  provision,  commodity,  or  luxury  that 
the  neighbourhood.  People  became  enthusiastic;  and  they 
eagerly  for  the  postman,  hoping  for  invitations. 
Before  long  the  invitations  began  pouring  out,  and  the 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

office  was  snowed  under,  and  voluntary  assistant  postmen 
up  the  Hill,  carrying  hundreds  of  polite  variations  on  Thank 

tance  except  on  party  business.  Even  those  who  had, 
inside.  Bilbo  was  busy:  writing  invitations,  ticking  off 
preparations  of  his  own.  From  the  time  of  Gandalf ’s  arrival 

of  Bilbo’s  front  door,  covered  with  ropes  and  poles  for  tents 
leading  to  the  road,  and  wide  steps  and  a  large  white  gate 
adjoining  the  field,  were  intensely  interested  and  generally 
in  his  garden. 
The  tents  began  to  go  up.  There  was  a  specially  large 
inside  it,  and  stood  proudly  near  one  end,  at  the  head  of 
More  promising  still  (to  the  hobbits’  mind):  an  enormous 
A  draught  of  cooks,  from  every  inn  and  eating-house  for 
odd  folic  that  were  quartered  at  Bag  End.  Excitement  rose  to 

the  eve  of  the  Party.  Anxiety  was  intense.  Then  Thursday, 
clouds  vanished,  flags  were  unfurled  and  the  fun  began. 
Bilbo  Baggins  called  it  a  party,  but  it  was  really  a  variety 
near  was  invited.  A  very  few  were  overlooked  by  accident, 


35 

people  from  other  parts  of  the  Shire  were  also  asked;  and 
the  guests  (and  additions)  at  the  new  white  gate  in  person. 
those  who  went  out  again  by  a  back  way  and  came  in  again 
own  birthdays.  Not  very  expensive  ones,  as  a  rule,  and  not 
Actually  in  Hobbiton  and  Bywater  every  day  in  the  year  was 
a  fair  chance  of  at  least  one  present  at  least  once  a  week.  But 

hobbit-children  were  so  excited  that  for  a  while  they  almost 
had  never  seen  before,  all  beautiful  and  some  obviously  magi¬ 
and  had  come  all  the  way  from  the  Mountain  and  from  Dale, 

inside  the  gate,  there  were  songs,  dances,  music,  games,  and, 
lunch,  tea,  and  dinner  (or  supper) .  But  lunch  and  tea  were 
were  sitting  down  and  eating  together.  At  other  times  there 
from  elevenses  until  six -thirty,  when  the  fireworks  started. 
The  fireworks  were  by  Gandalf:  they  were  not  only  brought 
effects,  set  pieces,  and  flights  of  rockets  were  let  off  by 
crackers,  backarappers,  sparklers,  torches,  dwarf-candles,  elf- 
superb.  The  art  of  Gandalf  improved  with  age. 
There  were  rockets  like  a  flight  of  scintillating  birds  singing 

36 


smoke:  their  leaves  opened  like  a  whole  spring  unfolding  in  a 
down  upon  the  astonished  hobbits,  disappearing  with  a  sweet 
were  fountains  of  butterflies  that  flew  glittering  into  the  trees; 
eagles,  or  sailing  ships,  or  a  phalanx  of  flying  swans;  there 
was  a  forest  of  silver  spears  that  sprang  suddenly  into  the  air 
the  Water  with  a  hiss  like  a  hundred  hot  snakes.  And  there 
the  hobbits  exceedingly,  as  Gandalf  intended.  The  lights  went 
seen  in  the  distance,  and  began  to  glow  at  the  summit.  It 
dragon  -  not  life-size,  but  terribly  life-like:  fire  came  from  his 
three  times  over  the  heads  of  the  crowd.  They  all  ducked, 
express  train,  turned  a  somersault,  and  burst  over  Bywater 

alarm  vanished  at  once,  and  the  prostrate  hobbits  leaped  to 
everyone,  that  is,  except  those  invited  to  the  special  family 
tree.  The  invitations  were  limited  to  twelve  dozen  (a  number 
not  considered  proper  to  use  of  people);  and  the  guests  were 
related,  with  the  addition  of  a  few  special  unrelated  friends 
present  by  parental  permission;  for  hobbits  were  easy-going 
when  there  was  a  chance  of  getting  them  a  free  meal.  Bringing 

A  LONG-EXPECTED  PARTY 


There  were  many  Bagginses  and  Boffins,  and  also  many 
lations  of  Bilbo  Baggins’  grandmother),  and  various  Chubbs 
Burrowses,  Bolgers,  Bracegirdles,  Brockhouses,  Goodbodies, 
distantly  connected  with  Bilbo,  and  some  had  hardly  ever 
the  Shire.  The  Sackville -Bagginses  were  not  forgotten.  Otho 
detested  Frodo,  but  so  magnificent  was  the  invitation  card, 
refuse.  Besides,  their  cousin,  Bilbo,  had  been  specializing  in 

ant  feast;  though  they  rather  dreaded  the  after-dinner  speech 
of  what  he  called  poetry;  and  sometimes,  after  a  glass  or 
journey.  The  guests  were  not  disappointed:  they  had  a  very 
abundant,  varied,  and  prolonged.  The  purchase  of  provisions 
weeks;  but  as  Bilbo’s  catering  had  depleted  the  stocks  of  most 
did  not  matter  much. 
After  the  feast  (more  or  less)  came  the  Speech.  Most  of 
delightful  stage  which  they  called  ‘filling  up  the  corners’. 
favourite  dainties,  and  their  fears  were  forgotten.  They  were 

Hear!  Hear!’  they  shouted,  and  kept  on  repeating  it  in  chorus, 
place  and  went  and  stood  on  a  chair  under  the  illuminated 

38 


golden  buttons  shone  on  his  embroidered  silk  waistcoat.  They 
other  was  in  his  trouser-pocket. 
My  dear  Bagginses  and  Boffins ,  he  began  again;  and  my 
Burrowses,  and  Hornblowers,  and  Bolgers,  Bracegirdles,  Good- 
elderly  hobbit  from  the  back  of  the  pavilion.  His  name,  of 
exceptionally  furry,  and  both  were  on  the  table. 
Proudfoots,  repeated  Bilbo.  Also  my  good  Sackville-Bagginses 
and  eleventh  birthday:  I  am  eleventy-one  today!  ‘Hurray!  Hur¬ 
mered  joyously  on  the  tables.  Bilbo  was  doing  splendidly. 

ening  cheers.  Cries  of  Yes  (and  No).  Noises  of  trumpets  and 
were,  as  has  been  said,  many  young  hobbits  present.  Hun¬ 
bore  the  mark  dale  on  them;  which  did  not  convey  much  to 
crackers.  They  contained  instruments,  small,  but  of  perfect 
the  young  Tooks  and  Brandybucks,  supposing  Uncle  Bilbo 
sary),  now  got  up  an  impromptu  orchestra,  and  began  a 
Brandybuck  got  on  a  table  and  with  bells  in  their  hands 
vigorous. 
But  Bilbo  had  not  finished.  Seizing  a  horn  from  a  youngster 
not  keep  you  long,  he  cried.  Cheers  from  all  the  assembly.  / 
way  that  he  said  this  made  an  impression.  There  was  almost 


39 


immensely  fond  of  you  all,  and  that  eleventy-one  years  is  too 
Tremendous  outburst  of  approval. 
I  don’t  know  half  of  you  half  as  well  as  I  should  like;  and  I 
unexpected  and  rather  difficult.  There  was  some  scattered 
see  if  it  came  to  a  compliment. 
Secondly,  to  celebrate  my  birthday.  Cheers  again.  I  should 
heir  and  nephew,  Frodo.  He  comes  of  age  and  into  his  inheritance 
loud  shouts  of  ‘Frodo!  Frodo!  Jolly  old  Frodo,’  from  the 
what  was  meant  by  ‘coming  into  his  inheritance’. 
Together  we  score  one  hundred  and  forty-four.  Your  numbers 
the  expression.  No  cheers.  This  was  ridiculous.  Many  of  the 
feeling  sure  they  had  only  been  asked  to  fill  up  the  required 
expression.’ 
It  is  also,  if  I  may  be  allowed  to  refer  to  ancient  history,  the 
Lake;  though  the  fact  that  it  was  my  birthday  slipped  my  memory 
seem  so  important.  The  banquet  was  very  splendid,  however, 
say  ‘thag you  very  buch’.  I  now  repeat  it  more  correctly:  Thank 
They  all  feared  that  a  song  or  some  poetry  was  now  immi¬ 
talking  and  let  them  drink  his  health?  But  Bilbo  did  not  sing 


40 


ANNOUNCEMENT.  He  spoke  this  last  word  so  loudly  and 
announce  that  -  though,  as  I  said,  eleventy-one  years  is  far  too 
Iam  leaving  NOW.  GOOD-BYE! 
He  stepped  down  and  vanished.  There  was  a  blinding  flash 
eyes  Bilbo  was  nowhere  to  be  seen.  One  hundred  and  forty- 
Proudfoot  removed  his  feet  from  the  table  and  stamped. 
deep  breaths,  every  Baggins,  Boffin,  Took,  Brandybuck, 
Goodbody,  Hornblower,  and  Proudfoot  began  to  talk  at  once. 
It  was  generally  agreed  that  the  joke  was  in  very  bad  taste, 
shock  and  annoyance.  ‘He’s  mad.  I  always  said  so,’  was 
a  few  exceptions)  thought  Bilbo’s  behaviour  was  absurd.  For 
disappearance  was  nothing  more  than  a  ridiculous  prank. 
But  old  Rory  Brandybuck  was  not  so  sure.  Neither  age  nor 
daughter-in-law,  Esmeralda:  ‘There’s  something  fishy  in  this, 
fool.  But  why  worry?  He  hasn’t  taken  the  vittles  with  him.’ 

some  time  he  had  sat  silent  beside  Bilbo’s  empty  chair,  and 
of  course,  even  though  he  had  been  in  the  know.  He  had 
of  the  guests.  But  at  the  same  time  he  felt  deeply  troubled: 
of  the  guests  went  on  eating  and  drinking  and  discussing 

A  LONG-EXPECTED  PARTY 


Bagginses  had  already  departed  in  wrath.  Frodo  did  not  want 
more  wine  to  be  served;  then  he  got  up  and  drained  his  own 
pavilion. 
As  for  Bilbo  Baggins,  even  while  he  was  making  his  speech, 
ring  that  he  had  kept  secret  for  so  many  years.  As  he  stepped 
any  hobbit  in  Hobbiton  again. 
He  walked  briskly  back  to  his  hole,  and  stood  for  a  moment 
sounds  of  merrymaking  in  other  parts  of  the  field.  Then  he 
in  tissue-paper  his  embroidered  silk  waistcoat,  and  put  it 
and  fastened  round  his  waist  a  worn  leather  belt.  On  it  he 
From  a  locked  drawer,  smelling  of  moth-balls,  he  took 
they  were  very  precious,  but  they  were  so  patched  and 
guessed:  it  might  have  been  dark  green.  They  were  rather  too 
strong-box  took  out  a  bundle  wrapped  in  old  cloths,  and  a 
The  book  and  bundle  he  stuffed  into  the  top  of  a  heavy  bag 
lope  he  slipped  his  golden  ring,  and  its  fine  chain,  and  then 
mantelpiece,  but  suddenly  he  removed  it  and  stuck  it  in  his 
quickly  in. 
‘Hullo!’  said  Bilbo.  ‘I  wondered  if  you  would  turn  up.’ 
‘I  am  glad  to  find  you  visible,’  replied  the  wizard,  sitting 

42 


final  words.  I  suppose  you  feel  that  everything  has  gone  off 

it  quite  startled  me,  let  alone  the  others.  A  little  addition  of 

and  it  seemed  to  me  necessary  to  give  your  guests  something 

body,’  laughed  Bilbo,  ‘but  I  expect  you  know  best,  as  usual.’ 
‘I  do  -  when  I  know  anything.  But  I  don’t  feel  too  sure 
You  have  had  your  joke,  and  alarmed  or  offended  most  of 
about  for  nine  days,  or  ninety-nine  more  likely.  Are  you  going 

I  have  told  you  before.  Probably  a  permanent  holiday:  I  don’t 
made  all  arrangements. 
‘I  am  old,  Gandalf.  I  don’t  look  it,  but  I  am  beginning 
snorted.  ‘Why,  I  feel  all  thin,  sort  of  stretched ,  if  you  know 
bread.  That  can’t  be  right.  I  need  a  change,  or  something.’ 
Gandalf  looked  curiously  and  closely  at  him.  ‘No,  it  does 
your  plan  is  probably  the  best.’ 
‘Well,  I’ve  made  up  my  mind,  anyway.  I  want  to  see  moun¬ 
where  I  can  rest.  In  peace  and  quiet,  without  a  lot  of  relatives 
on  the  bell.  I  might  find  somewhere  where  I  can  finish  my 
happily  ever  after  to  the  end  of  his  days’ 
Gandalf  laughed.  ‘I  hope  he  will.  But  nobody  will  read  the 

A  LONG-EXPECTED  PARTY 


‘Oh,  they  may,  in  years  to  come.  Frodo  has  read  some 
won’t  you?’ 
‘Yes,  I  will  -  two  eyes,  as  often  as  I  can  spare  them.’ 
‘Fie  would  come  with  me,  of  course,  if  I  asked  him.  In  fact 
really  want  to,  yet.  I  want  to  see  the  wild  country  again  before 
Shire,  with  woods  and  fields  and  little  rivers.  He  ought  to  be 
except  a  few  oddments.  I  hope  he  will  be  happy,  when  he 
now.’ 
‘Everything?’  said  Gandalf.  ‘The  ring  as  well?  You  agreed 



‘There  on  the  mantelpiece.  Well,  no!  Here  it  is  in  my 
to  himself.  ‘Yet  after  all,  why  not?  Why  shouldn’t  it  stay 

gleam  in  his  eyes.  ‘I  think,  Bilbo,’  he  said  quietly,  ‘I  should 

with  it  at  all,  I  may  say.  And  I  don’t  really  see  why  I  should. 
came  over  his  voice.  It  was  sharp  with  suspicion  and  annoy¬ 
have  never  bothered  me  about  the  other  things  that  I  got  on 

truth.  It  was  important.  Magic  rings  are  -  well,  magical;  and 
your  ring,  you  may  say;  and  I  still  am.  I  should  like  to  know 

44 


had  it  quite  long  enough.  You  won’t  need  it  any  more,  Bilbo, 

kindly  face  grew  hard.  ‘Why  not?’  he  cried.  ‘And  what 
own  things?  It  is  my  own.  I  found  it.  It  came  to  me.’ 
‘Yes,  yes,’  said  Gandalf.  ‘But  there  is  no  need  to  get  angry.’ 
‘If  I  am  it  is  your  fault,’  said  Bilbo.  ‘It  is  mine,  I  tell  you. 

a  flicker  in  his  deep  eyes  showed  that  he  was  startled  and 
not  by  you.’ 
‘But  I  say  it  now.  And  why  not?  Even  if  Gollum  said  the 
say.’ 
Gandalf  stood  up.  He  spoke  sternly.  ‘You  will  be  a  fool  if 
word  you  say.  It  has  got  far  too  much  hold  on  you.  Let  it  go! 


life  we  have  been  friends,  and  you  owe  me  something.  Come! 

‘But  you  won’t  get  it.  I  won’t  give  my  Precious  away,  I  tell 

soon,’  he  said.  ‘If  you  say  that  again,  I  shall.  Then  you  will 
hobbit,  and  he  seemed  to  grow  tall  and  menacing;  his  shadow 

clutching  at  his  pocket.  They  stood  for  a  while  facing  one 
remained  bent  on  the  hobbit.  Slowly  his  hands  relaxed,  and 

A  LONG-EXPECTED  PARTY 


‘I  don’t  know  what  has  come  over  you,  Gandalf,’  he  said. 
is  mine  isn’t  it?  I  found  it,  and  Gollum  would  have  killed  me, 

am  not  one  either.  I  am  not  trying  to  rob  you,  but  to  help 
away,  and  the  shadow  passed.  He  seemed  to  dwindle  again 

‘But  I  felt  so  queer.  And  yet  it  would  be  a  relief  in  a  way  not 
my  mind  lately.  Sometimes  I  have  felt  it  was  like  an  eye 
disappear,  don’t  you  know;  or  wondering  if  it  is  safe,  and 
I  couldn’t  rest  without  it  in  my  pocket.  I  don’t  know  why. 

away  and  leave  it  behind.  Stop  possessing  it.  Give  it  to  Frodo, 

he  sighed.  ‘All  right,’  he  said  with  an  effort.  ‘I  will.’  Then  he 
that’s  what  this  party  business  was  all  about,  really:  to  give 
to  give  it  away  at  the  same  time.  It  hasn’t  made  it  any  easier 
It  would  quite  spoil  the  joke.’ 
‘Indeed  it  would  take  away  the  only  point  I  ever  saw  in  the 

He  drew  a  deep  breath.  ‘And  now  I  really  must  be  starting, 
couldn’t  bear  to  do  it  all  over  again.’  He  picked  up  his  bag 


46 


‘Well,  so  I  have!’  cried  Bilbo.  ‘And  my  will  and  all  the  other 
That  will  be  safest.’ 
‘No,  don’t  give  the  ring  to  me,’  said  Gandalf.  ‘Put  it  on  the 
shall  wait  for  him.’ 
Bilbo  took  out  the  envelope,  but  just  as  he  was  about  to  set 
the  floor.  Before  he  could  pick  it  up,  the  wizard  stooped  and 
swiftly  over  the  hobbit’s  face  again.  Suddenly  it  gave  way  to 


from  the  stand;  then  he  whistled.  Three  dwarves  came  out 

labelled?’ 
‘Everything,’  they  answered. 
‘Well,  let’s  start  then!’  He  stepped  out  of  the  front-door. 
It  was  a  fine  night,  and  the  black  sky  was  dotted  with  stars. 
again,  off  on  the  Road  with  dwarves!  This  is  what  I  have 
at  his  old  home  and  bowing  to  the  door.  ‘Good-bye,  Gandalf!  ’ 
‘Good-bye,  for  the  present,  Bilbo.  Take  care  of  yourself! 

as  happy  now  as  I  have  ever  been,  and  that  is  saying  a  great 
last,’  he  added,  and  then  in  a  low  voice,  as  if  to  himself,  he 

Down  from  the  door  where  it  began. 
Now  far  ahead  the  Road  has  gone, 
And  I  must  follow,  if  I  can, 


47 


Where  many  paths  and  errands  meet. 
And  whither  then?  I  cannot  say. 
He  paused,  silent  for  a  moment.  Then  without  another  word 
tents,  and  followed  by  his  three  companions  went  round 
jumped  over  a  low  place  in  the  hedge  at  the  bottom,  and  took 
in  the  grass. 
Gandalf  remained  for  a  while  staring  after  him  into  the 
ing!’  he  said  softly  and  went  back  indoors. 
Frodo  came  in  soon  afterwards,  and  found  him  sitting  in 


a  joke,’  said  Frodo.  ‘But  I  knew  in  my  heart  that  he  really 
wish  I  had  come  back  sooner,  just  to  see  him  off.’ 
‘I  think  really  he  preferred  slipping  off  quietly  in  the  end,’ 
He  left  a  packet  for  you.  There  it  is!’ 
Frodo  took  the  envelope  from  the  mantelpiece,  and  glanced 

think,’  said  the  wizard.  ‘You  are  the  master  of  Bag  End  now. 

why.  Still,  it  may  be  useful.’ 
‘It  may,  and  it  may  not,’  said  Gandalf.  ‘I  should  not  make 
Now  I  am  going  to  bed.’ 
*  *  * 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

good-bye  to  the  guests.  Rumours  of  strange  events  had  by 
doubt  everything  will  be  cleared  up  in  the  morning.  About  mid¬ 
they  rolled  away,  filled  with  full  but  very  unsatisfied  hobbits. 
barrows  those  that  had  inadvertently  remained  behind. 
Night  slowly  passed.  The  sun  rose.  The  hobbits  rose  rather 
to  clear  away  the  pavilions  and  the  tables  and  the  chairs,  and 
and  the  flowering  shrubs  in  boxes,  and  the  crumbs  and 
chiefs,  and  the  uneaten  food  (a  very  small  item).  Then  a 
and  Boffins,  and  Bolgers,  and  Tooks,  and  other  guests  that 
fed  were  out  and  about  again,  there  was  a  large  crowd  at  Bag 

tired  and  worried.  He  welcomed  all  the  callers,  but  he  had 
was  simply  this:  ‘Air.  Bilbo  Baggins  has  gone  away;  as  far  as 
inside,  as  Bilbo  had  left  ‘messages’  for  them. 
Inside  in  the  hall  there  was  piled  a  large  assortment  of 
item  there  was  a  label  tied.  There  were  several  labels  of  this 

an  umbrella.  Adelard  had  carried  off  many  unlabelled  ones. 
For  DORA  BAGGINS  in  memory  of  a  LONG  correspon¬ 
Dora  was  Drogo’s  sister  and  the  eldest  surviving  female  rela¬ 
reams  of  good  advice  for  more  than  half  a  century. 


on  a  gold  pen  and  ink-bottle.  Milo  never  answered  letters. 
For  ANGELICA’S  use,  from  Uncle  Bilbo ;  on  a  round  convex 
sidered  her  face  shapely. 
For  the  collection  of  HUGO  BRACEGIRDLE,  from  a  con¬ 
of  books,  and  worse  than  usual  at  returning  them. 
For  LOBELIA  SACKVTI J E-BAGGTNS,  as  a  PRESENT, 
acquired  a  good  many  of  his  spoons,  while  he  was  away  on 
arrived  later  in  the  day,  she  took  the  point  at  once,  but  she 

Bilbo’s  residence  had  got  rather  cluttered  up  with  things  in 
to  get  cluttered  up:  for  which  the  custom  of  giving  so  many 
that  the  birthday-presents  were  always  new;  there  were  one 
around  the  district;  but  Bilbo  had  usually  given  new  presents, 
cleared  a  little. 
Every  one  of  the  various  parting  gifts  had  labels,  written 
joke.  But,  of  course,  most  of  the  things  were  given  where 
especially  those  of  Bagshot  Row,  did  very  well.  Old  Gaffer 
waistcoat,  and  a  bottle  of  ointment  for  creaking  joints.  Old 
bottles  of  Old  Winyards:  a  strong  red  wine  from  the  South¬ 
Bilbo’s  father.  Rory  quite  forgave  Bilbo,  and  voted  him  a 

50 


There  was  plenty  of  everything  left  for  Frodo.  And,  of 
and  more  than  enough  furniture,  were  left  in  his  possession. 
lery:  not  a  penny-piece  or  a  glass  bead  was  given  away. 
Frodo  had  a  very  trying  time  that  afternoon.  A  false  rumour 
like  wildfire;  and  before  long  the  place  was  packed  with 
Labels  got  torn  off  and  mixed,  and  quarrels  broke  out.  Some 
tried  to  make  off  with  minor  items  not  addressed  to  them,  or 
to  the  gate  was  blocked  with  barrows  and  handcarts. 
In  the  middle  of  the  commotion  the  Sackville-Bagginses 
Merry  Brandybuck  to  keep  an  eye  on  things.  When  Otho 


him  and  we  mean  to  see  him.  Just  go  and  tell  him  so!’ 
Merry  left  them  a  long  while  in  the  hall,  and  they  had  time 
their  tempers.  Eventually  they  were  shown  into  the  study. 
him.  He  looked  indisposed  -  to  see  Sackville-Bagginses  at 
pocket.  But  he  spoke  quite  politely. 
The  Sackville-Bagginses  were  rather  offensive.  They  began 
various  valuable  and  unlabelled  things.  When  Frodo  replied 
given  away,  they  said  the  whole  affair  was  very  fishy. 
‘Only  one  thing  is  clear  to  me,’  said  Otho,  ‘and  that  is  that 
the  will.’ 


51 

of  Frodo.  He  read  the  will  carefully  and  snorted.  It  was, 
customs  of  hobbits,  which  demand  among  other  things  seven 

years.  Spoons?  Fiddlesticks!’  He  snapped  his  fingers  under 
got  rid  of.  A  little  later  Frodo  came  out  of  the  study  to  see 
investigating  nooks  and  corners,  and  tapping  the  floors.  He 
her  of  several  small  (but  rather  valuable)  articles  that  had 
was  in  the  throes  of  thinking  out  a  really  crushing  parting 
was: 
‘You’ll  five  to  regret  it,  young  fellow!  Why  didn’t  you  go 
a  Brandybuck!’ 
‘Did  you  hear  that,  Merry?  That  was  an  insult,  if  you  like,’ 

course,  not  true.’ 
Then  they  went  round  the  hole,  and  evicted  three  young 
in  the  walls  of  one  of  the  cellars.  Frodo  also  had  a  tussle  with 
who  had  begun  an  excavation  in  the  larger  pantry,  where  he 
both  curiosity  and  hope;  for  legendary  gold  (mysteriously 
anyone’s  for  the  finding  -  unless  the  search  is  interrupted. 
When  he  had  overcome  Sancho  and  pushed  him  out, 
shop,  Merry,’  he  said.  ‘Lock  the  door,  and  don’t  open  it  to 


THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  RING 

he  went  to  revive  himself  with  a  belated  cup  of  tea. 
He  had  hardly  sat  down,  when  there  came  a  soft  knock  at 
must  have  thought  of  something  really  nasty,  and  have  come 

louder,  but  he  took  no  notice.  Suddenly  the  wizard’s  head 

down  your  hole  and  out  through  the  hill,’  he  said. 
‘My  dear  Gandalf!  Half  a  minute!’  cried  Frodo,  running 
was  Lobelia.’ 
‘Then  I  forgive  you.  But  I  saw  her  some  time  ago,  driving 
curdled  new  milk.’ 
‘She  had  already  nearly  curdled  me.  Honestly,  I  nearly 

of  that  ring,  Frodo!  In  fact,  it  is  partly  about  that  that  I  have 



found  it,  and  how  he  used  it:  on  his  journey,  I  mean.’ 
Which  story,  I  wonder,’  said  Gandalf. 
‘Oh,  not  what  he  told  the  dwarves  and  put  in  his  book,’ 
to  live  here.  He  said  you  had  pestered  him  till  he  told 
Frodo,”  he  said;  “but  they  are  not  to  go  any  further.  It’s  mine 

of  it  all?’ 
‘If  you  mean,  inventing  all  that  about  a  “present”,  well,  I 

A  LONG-EXPECTED  PARTY  53 
the  point  of  altering  it  at  all.  It  was  very  unlike  Bilbo  to  do 

such  treasures  -  if  they  use  them.  Let  it  be  a  warning  to  you 
making  you  vanish  when  you  wish  to.’ 
‘I  don’t  understand,’  said  Frodo. 
‘Neither  do  I,’  answered  the  wizard.  ‘I  have  merely  begun 
to  worry.  But  if  you  take  my  advice  you  will  use  it  very 
way  that  will  cause  talk  or  rouse  suspicion.  I  say  again:  keep 


tell  you  something  when  I  come  back.  I  am  going  off  at  once: 

on  for  at  least  a  week.  I  was  looking  forward  to  your  help.’ 
‘I  did  mean  to  -  but  I  have  had  to  change  my  mind.  I  may 
soon  as  I  can.  Expect  me  when  you  see  me!  I  shall  slip  in 
find  that  I  have  become  rather  unpopular.  They  say  I  am  a 
ally  accusing  me  of  spiriting  Bilbo  away,  or  worse.  If  you 
and  me  to  get  hold  of  his  wealth.’ 
‘Some  people!’  exclaimed  Frodo.  ‘You  mean  Otho  and 
everything  else,  if  I  could  get  Bilbo  back  and  go  off  tramping 
somehow,  that  I  had  gone  too.  I  wonder  if  I  shall  ever  see 

Good-bye  now!  Take  care  of  yourself!  Look  out  for  me, 

54 


Frodo  saw  him  to  the  door.  He  gave  a  final  wave  of  his 
the  old  wizard  looked  unusually  bent,  almost  as  if  he  was 
cloaked  figure  quickly  vanished  into  the  twilight.  Frodo  did 
